Introduce NIP-59 gift wrap (#716)
nostr-protocol/nips: 59.md

- A `rumor` is a regular nostr event, but is **not signed**. This means that if it is leaked, it cannot be verified.
- A `rumor` is serialized to JSON, encrypted, and placed in the `content` field of a `seal`. The `seal` is then signed by the author of the note. The only information publicly available on a `seal` is who signed it, but not what was said.
- A `seal` is serialized to JSON, encrypted, and placed in the `content` field of a `gift wrap`.

This allows the isolation of concerns across layers:

- A rumor carries the content but is unsigned, which means if leaked it will be rejected by relays and clients,
  and can't be authenticated. This provides a measure of deniability.
- A seal identifies the author without revealing the content or the recipient.
- A gift wrap can add metadata (recipient, tags, a different author) without revealing the true author.

# Protocol Description

## 1. The Rumor Event Kind

A `rumor` is the same thing as an unsigned event. Any event kind can be made a `rumor` by removing the signature.

## 2. The Seal Event Kind

A `seal` is a `kind:13` event that wraps a `rumor` with the sender's regular key. The `seal` is **always** encrypted

> to a receiver's pubkey but there is no `p` tag pointing to the receiver. There is no way to know who the rumor is for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with a conversation key derived from the author's private key and the recipient's public key and there is no `p` tag pointing to the receiver. There is no way to know who the rumor is for
```

without the receiver's or the sender's private key. The only public information in this event is who is signing it.

```js
{
  "id": "<id>",
  "pubkey": "<real author's pubkey>",
  "content": "<encrypted rumor>",
  "kind": 13,
  "created_at": 1686840217,
  "tags": [],
  "sig": "<real author's pubkey signature>"
}
```

Tags MUST must always be empty in a `kind:13`. The inner event MUST always be unsigned.

## 3. Gift Wrap Event Kind

> A `gift wrap` event is a `kind:1059` event that wraps any other event. `tags` MUST include a single `p` tag containing the recipient's public key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `gift wrap` event is a `kind:1059` event that wraps any other event. `tags` MUST include a single `p` tag containing the recipient's public key. The `gift wrap` content is **always** encrypted
with a conversation key derived from an ephemeral, random private key and the recipient's public key
```

  "id": "9dd003c6d3b73b74a85a9ab099469ce251653a7af76f523671ab828acd2a0ef9"
}
```

## 2. Seal the rumor

Encrypt the JSON-encoded `rumor` with a conversation key derived using the author's private key and the recipient's public key. Place the result in the `content` field of a `kind 13` `seal` event. Sign it with the author's key.

```json
{
  "content": "AqBCdwoS7/tPK+QGkPCadJTn8FxGkd24iApo3BR9/M0uw6n4RFAFSPAKKMgkzVMoRyR3ZS/aqATDFvoZJOkE9cPG/TAzmyZvr/WUIS8kLmuI1dCA+itFF6+ULZqbkWS0YcVU0j6UDvMBvVlGTzHz+UHzWYJLUq2LnlynJtFap5k8560+tBGtxi9Gx2NIycKgbOUv0gEqhfVzAwvg1IhTltfSwOeZXvDvd40rozONRxwq8hjKy+4DbfrO0iRtlT7G/eVEO9aJJnqagomFSkqCscttf/o6VeT2+A9JhcSxLmjcKFG3FEK3Try/WkarJa1jM3lMRQqVOZrzHAaLFW/5sXano6DqqC5ERD6CcVVsrny0tYN4iHHB8BHJ9zvjff0NjLGG/v5Wsy31+BwZA8cUlfAZ0f5EYRo9/vKSd8TV0wRb9DQ=",
  "kind": 13,
  "created_at": 1703015180,
  "pubkey": "611df01bfcf85c26ae65453b772d8f1dfd25c264621c0277e1fc1518686faef9",
  "tags": [],
  "id": "28a87d7c074d94a58e9e89bb3e9e4e813e2189f285d797b1c56069d36f59eaa7",
  "sig": "02fc3facf6621196c32912b1ef53bac8f8bfe9db51c0e7102c073103586b0d29c3f39bdaa1e62856c20e90b6c7cc5dc34ca8bb6a528872cf6e65e6284519ad73"
}
```

## 3. Wrap the seal

> Encrypt the JSON-encoded `kind 13` event with your ephemeral, single-use random key. Place the result in the `content` field of a `kind 1059`. Add a single `p` tag containing the recipient's public key. Sign the `gift wrap` using the random key generated in the previous step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Encrypt the JSON-encoded `kind 13` event with a conversation key derived using the ephemeral, single-use random key and the recipient's public key. Place the result in the `content` field of a `kind 1059`. Add a single `p` tag containing the recipient's public key. Sign the `gift wrap` using the random key generated in the previous step.
```

  and can't be authenticated. This provides a measure of deniability.
- A seal identifies the author without revealing the content or the recipient.
- A gift wrap can add metadata (recipient, tags, a different author) without revealing the true author.

# Protocol Description

## 1. The Rumor Event Kind

A `rumor` is the same thing as an unsigned event. Any event kind can be made a `rumor` by removing the signature.

## 2. The Seal Event Kind

A `seal` is a `kind:13` event that wraps a `rumor` with the sender's regular key. The `seal` is **always** encrypted
to a receiver's pubkey but there is no `p` tag pointing to the receiver. There is no way to know who the rumor is for
without the receiver's or the sender's private key. The only public information in this event is who is signing it.

```js
{
  "id": "<id>",
  "pubkey": "<real author's pubkey>",
  "content": "<encrypted rumor>",
  "kind": 13,
  "created_at": 1686840217,
  "tags": [],
  "sig": "<real author's pubkey signature>"
}
```

Tags MUST must always be empty in a `kind:13`. The inner event MUST always be unsigned.

## 3. Gift Wrap Event Kind

> A `gift wrap` event is a `kind:1059` event that wraps any other event. `tags` MUST include a single `p` tag

Reviewer 2: Or, since there are privacy implications, we may just need to define a separate wrap kind where tags are always empty and the pubkey is not random. 

The random pubkey kind is like UDP (just push events) and what you want is a TCP-like kind (ack-first-then-push). 

Either wrap can carry the same DM kinds. And you can define your authorization-to-receive-scheme in the wrap kind itself.

> A `gift wrap` event is a `kind:1059` event that wraps any other event. `tags` MUST include a single `p` tag

Author: Removed this part and added some clarifications that NIP 59 shouldn't be used on its own.

```js
{
  "id": "<id>",
  "pubkey": "<real author's pubkey>",
  "content": "<encrypted rumor>",
  "kind": 13,
  "created_at": 1686840217,
  "tags": [],
  "sig": "<real author's pubkey signature>"
}
```

Tags MUST must always be empty in a `kind:13`. The inner event MUST always be unsigned.

## 3. Gift Wrap Event Kind

A `gift wrap` event is a `kind:1059` event that wraps any other event. `tags` MUST include a single `p` tag containing the recipient's public key.

The goal is to hide the sender's information, the metadata, and the content of the original event from the public. The only public information is the receiver's public key.

```js
{
  "id": "<id>",
  "pubkey": "<random, one-time-use pubkey>",
  "content": "<encrypted kind 13>",
  "kind": 1059,
  "created_at": 1686840217,
  "tags": [["p", "<Receiver>"]],
  "sig": "<random, one-time-use pubkey signature>"
}
```

# Encrypting Payloads

Encryption is done following NIP-44 on the JSON-encoded event. Place the the encryption payload in the `.content`
of the wrapper event (either a `seal` or a `gift wrap`).

# Other Considerations

> Because ephemeral keys are often used to sign `gift wrap`s, a `seal` MAY include a `wrap_privkey` tag that

Reviewer 2: This `wrap_privkey` links sender and receiver in a verifiable manner and can be revealed by the receiver at any time without any damage to the receiver's data. Adding it requires trusting the receiver and thus, I believe it requires some privacy risk warning.

Author: I don't understand, if the key is ephemeral what information is being shared?

Reviewer 2: If the key to the gift wrap is added to the seal, you are cryptographically linking them. The point of separating them was to unlink it. :)

Author: I see what you mean. Would putting it on the rumor be any better?

Reviewer 2: I think the best way would be to do https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/pull/539 with the receiver's key. Or simply make it so any GiftWrap can be deleted by the `p`-tag.

Author: Neither of those works for groups, since the shared key is the recipient (neither does this I guess). So anyone in the group would be able to delete the message. In that scenario the actual publisher would also have to hold on to the generated key in order to delete the event. But I guess if clients implement deletes, it would be enough to delete the rumor's id instead of the wrap's.

Author: I've removed the paragraph, so resolved, but still unsolved.

NIP-59
======

Gift Wrap
---------

> `draft` `optional` `authorPrivateKey:vitorpamplona` `author:kieran` `author:paulmillr` `author:staab`

Author: heh global find and replace

NIP-59
======

Gift Wrap
---------

`draft` `optional` `author:vitorpamplona` `author:kieran` `author:paulmillr` `author:staab`

This NIP defines a protocol for encapsulating any nostr event. This makes it possible to obscure almost all metadata for a given event, perform collaborative signing, and more.

This NIP relies on [NIP-44](44.md)'s versioned encryption algorithms.

# Overview

This protocol uses three main concepts to protect the transmission of a target event: `rumor`s, `seal`s, and `gift wrap`s.

> - A `rumor` is a regular nostr event, but is **not signed**. This means that if it is leaked, it cannot be verified.

Reviewer 3: I'm skeptical about calling this a rumor. Even though the name perfectly describes it, it doesn't fit the paradigm of `EventTemplate` -> `UnsignedEvent` -> `Event`.

https://github.com/nbd-wtf/nostr-tools/blob/master/event.ts#L45

I think it is most close to `UnsignedEvent`, except that in UnsignedEvent the `id` is optional.

`rumor` is also shorter and has a specific connotation that `UnsignedEvent` doesn't. So I have mixed feelings.

Reviewer 4: My library nostr-types takes a `PreEvent` into an `Event` by computing an `Id` and adding a `Signature`.   A `Rumor` is half-way between those two concepts.  But I just did the pragmatic thing and made a new type, and the code that turns a PreEvent to an Event doesn't pass it through the Rumor stage.  Does it look like it could be refactored. Sure. But I'm not sure.

Author: >  it doesn't fit the paradigm of EventTemplate -> UnsignedEvent -> Event.

Seems to me a good argument for a new term. Although arguably according to the above paradigm it should be something more like `EventTemplate` -> `RawEvent` -> `UnsignedEvent` -> `Event`.

# An Example

Let's send a wrapped `kind 1` message between two parties asking "Are you going to the party tonight?"

- Author private key: `0beebd062ec8735f4243466049d7747ef5d6594ee838de147f8aab842b15e273`
- Recipient private key: `e108399bd8424357a710b606ae0c13166d853d327e47a6e5e038197346bdbf45`
- Ephemeral wrapper key: `4f02eac59266002db5801adc5270700ca69d5b8f761d8732fab2fbf233c90cbd`

## 1. Create an event

Create a `kind 1` event with the message, the receivers, and any other tags you want, signed by the author. Do not sign the event.

```json
{
  "kind": 1,
  "created_at": 1691518405,
  "pubkey": "611df01bfcf85c26ae65453b772d8f1dfd25c264621c0277e1fc1518686faef9",
  "content": "Are you going to the party tonight?",
  "tags": [["p", "166bf3765ebd1fc55decfe395beff2ea3b2a4e0a8946e7eb578512b555737c99"]],
  "id": "90297600a3b91c41a8a044993efb7f0b568e5944020bfee9c50ad7dae0d8c729"
}
```

## 2. Seal the rumor

Encrypt the JSON-encoded `rumor` with a conversation key derived using the **Sender**'s private key and the recipient's public key. JSON-encode the resulting object and place it in the `content` field of a `kind 13` `seal` event. Sign it with the **Sender**'s key.

```json
{

>   "content": "{\"ciphertext\":\"f5Lfq6a9laLW9PWuYatTTnrGOSHcGJUPnb5OQ/gEEVjtDnrOzDB9VFKdUkoImEMiO6Ddu+HYn0R3hUtqgTRppOjs4zNFTLNAP/3hkN3hAaKjvUzBVYVmU1xrBS749kUhCt8v/8l/tBeen9BYB4s1luAUqdS10h8jwM+NqE8aYrv9sEU9AaLuErbI1hwq0ZUEGl5unfxHpv+QjINbrPYs1x6bGUU7D416Lp0gV6fr/wD/JLkceb/quAE2UkgzVRS4gauWL8/PyaPz3332h+vH/tMWOQd2no4sDG3ftXPO8y0zXs5p/NvcPa2hIXsOsNOPzOfCFvBk7Rfv9JjwCN0K/LztDHZOzgryELAjcm+mDWPeYBw+PYWfwayFkDbbLCsQJ1KLYRBDS7BEMBOLdd1v1vF4J196tGaN\",\"nonce\":\"s6DBwU6gq9h14+9hRwnts1qZ6BdyPgHn\",\"v\":1}",

Reviewer 5: is there a reason these fields are as json in the content instead of just tags?

Author: The payload is defined by NIP 44 (#715), so it can't be split across tags. @vitorpamplona wanted it to be json. I personally prefer @paulmillr's original version that is CSV oriented, but Paul has also suggested doing `base64.encode(JSON.stringify({cyphertext, nonce, v}))`. It's just bikeshedding at this point.

Reviewer 5: @vitorpamplona what is the problem with large tags?

Reviewer 5: as someone writing a relay and database, all I can say is anytime I have to parse json it's a pita. tags are in a decoded form already.

Reviewer 2: > @vitorpamplona what is the problem with large tags?

Indexing of large tags is bad. A Relational Implementation of Nostr will not have a choice to remove certain tags before indexing. I would generally avoid breaking their implementation if we can

Reviewer 5: relays only index single-char tags

Author: You shouldn't have to parse this payload on a relay unless you're decrypting the payload, it's intended to be opaque.
